% INASP BMO<br />
  Network traffic monitoring workshop<br />
  Unit 1 - The Bandwidth Challenge
% Dick Elleray - AfriConnect (delleray@africonnect.com);
  Chris Wilson - Aptivate (chris+inaspbmo2013@aptivate.org)
% 2013-04-29

### Objectives

* Identify key reasons why network traffic should be monitored
* Discuss why continuous traffic monitoring is important
* See if / how network traffic monitoring is being done in representative institutions

### But firstly

* What is the challenge being faced:
	* Not enough bandwidth?
	* Too costly?
	* Need for more?
* In reality ... in Africa ... in Universities

### What is the bandwidth challenge?

* Available bandwidth is very low compared to Western universities;
* Western online culture drives demand for more bandwidth;
* Users' abuse of shared resource hurts others more than themselves.

### Why this problem exists

#### Historical access issues

* Lack of infrastructure, especially copper and fibre networks
* Lack of competitive service providers
* High costs of installing infrastructure
* Long delay in investment and deregulation

### Why this problem exists

#### Shared resources always need management

* Requires advanced knowledge, skills and equipment
* Homes, businesses and universities all need bandwidth management
* Hence the number of expensive products on the market!

### Key findings from ATICS survey 2006

#### African university = European home

The average African university has bandwidth capacity equivalent to a 
broadband residential connection available in Europe:

* average bandwidth reported is 537/769 Kbps
* lowest bandwidth capacity of 28/28 Kbps
* highest capacity of 7 Mbps/7 Mbps.

### Key findings from ATICS survey 2006

#### African university pays 50x more than European home

On average 50 times more for their bandwidth than their educational 
counterparts in the rest of the world:

* highest bandwidth cost in the US is $36.33/kbps/month
* average cost per Kbps/month is US$5.46
* lowest cost is zero, as some institutions are paying nothing for their bandwidth because of subsidies.

### Key findings from ATICS survey 2006

#### Limited bandwidth per computer

* Lowest is 0.32Kbps
* Highest is about 37Kbps
* Average is 3.36Kbps.

### Key findings from ATICS survey 2006

#### Always congested

* The average percentage of time where links are at 100% capacity is over 60%
	* This is extremely high, given that this is measured over 24 hours a day every day of the month.
* 59% of institutions do not monitor or manage bandwidth

### Effects of bandwidth challenges

#### Difficulties in using Internet based information resources and communication tools

* Digital library resources are under utilised
* Resource license costs can be less effective
* Free or low cost resources are difficult to take advantage of
* The digital library revolution is difficult to participate in
* Continued digital divide

### Effects of bandwidth challenges

#### Under utilisation of ICT capacities and investments

* All of this impacts on a university’s core activities, especially those that require up to date and a wide range of information resources e.g. teaching and research.
* Inefficient allocation of resources?
	* Network costs e.g. Bandwidth charges of $5,000 per month that result in an unusable link – is that money well spent?
	* Infrastructure costs e.g. PC computer labs that users spend most of their time sitting around waiting for pages to display – is that money well spent?

### Possible solutions

* Doing nothing
* More bandwidth and at lower cost
* Better management of existing resource
* Combination of the above
	* Better management and optimisation of bandwidth is essential
	* Even if bandwidth is doubled, it will still need managing to ensure maximum efficiency

### Group Discussion

#### Can you identify the challenges your institution faces with respect to BMO?

* What impact are they having on user satisfaction?
* What impact are they having on the perception of how good an I.T. team your institution has?
* What impact are they having on the outside world view of the institution?

### Group Discussion

#### Are these being addressed within your institution?

* Technically?
* With policies?
* With both?
* If not, why not?

### Bandwidth management – some comments

* Monitoring and management of the available resource
* Optimisation of the resource to ensure value for money and fitness of purpose

For example:

* Monitoring of bandwidth to know how it is being used
* Implementation of policies to guide effective use
* Technical tools and resources to optimise use

### Bandwidth management – some comments

#### Who is responsible?

Different people need to be involved in this:

* Executive management
* Senior implementation management
* Technical staff involved in the day-to-day implementation
* Academics, librarians and other legitimate Internet users

### Can you help?

* What problems are you experiencing?
* Have you found a good tool or skills?
* Give us the benefit of your experience: especially with a successful problem resolution!
* Share your knowledge with others, don't hide or sell it.
* Build a community in your country.